# BMIN503/EPID600 Final Project

This repository contains templates for your final written report and GitHub repository. Follow the instructions below to clone this repository, and then turn in your final project's code via a pull request to this repository.


1. To start, **fork** this BMIN503_Final_Project repository.
1. **Clone** the forked repository to your computer.
1. Modify the files provided, add your own, and **commit** changes to complete your final project.
1. **Push**/sync the changes up to your GitHub account.
1. Create a **pull request** on this, the original BMIN503_Final_Project, repository to turn in your final project.


Follow the instructions [here][forking] if you are unsure what the above steps mean.

DUE DATE FOR FINAL VERSION: 12/09/22 11:59PM. This is a hard deadline. Turn in whatever you have by this date.

<!-- Links -->
[forking]: https://guides.github.com/activities/forking/

TITLE: Philadelphia Landscape Assessment of Social-Demographic Characteristics for Receiving Adequate Prenatal Care in 2020-2021

### Overview
ABSTRACT: This project utilized data from the Center for Disease (CDC) WONDER Database 2016-2020 (expanded version), which follows an ad-hoc query system for *the analysis of public health data.* Using a multiple logistic regression model, the study aimed to identify the relationship between four selected maternal characteristics and receiving adequate prenatal care services with an emphasis on migrant populations in Philadelphia County, PA (n=18,084) and compare results state-wide performance in Pennsylvania (n=118,531). 
                
TEAM DETAILS: This project was discussed with the data team at the City of Philadelphia, Department of Public Health (PDPH) within the Maternal, Child, and Family Health Division (MCFH). Members of the data team, MH and AM have been initialized for the team's privacy. (Names can be found in the discussion comments of the Canvas Submission). The team consisted of a quantitative data analyst specialist (MP) MPH, CPH, and the City's chief medical officer MD, MPP. 

MH MPH, CPH was involved in assisting the development of the statistical approach. Meetings involved discussion of the best statistical process for the data set. MH recommended using multiple logistic regression and determining if prenatal services have been provided adequately through a dichotomous approach (Y/N to receiving adequate prenatal care) to simplify data interpretation. She is in the process of cleaning the Live Births data for Philadelphia (n=20,000) from this past year so we can apply the coding methods to a more recent and (potentially more) accurate dataset. The intended dataset would specifically consider undocumented immigrants determined via insurance status recorded within Philadelphia County birth certificate forms.  We are awaiting IRB approval in the meantime; the CDC dataset was used as a preliminary exercise to ensure the steps in the code worked accurately. 

AM MD, MPP acted in a supervisory role as chief medical officer to guide the selection of maternal social characteristics for assessment and identify the project's social impact. There is currently very little understanding of migrant research and their respective health outcomes in Philadelphia, especially for maternal care.

The coding material will be used with a different dataset to utilize the findings to identify potential social barriers. The information from this project will ideally confirm the need for a larger strategy proposal by acting as a *City Landscape Assessment* for developing a healthcare service delivery model for prenatal care for undocumented immigrants. 

>https://github.com/shaizas/BMIN503_Final_Project 

### Introduction 
Comprehensive prenatal care has been shown to lead to improved health outcomes for both mothers and newborns.1 If sought early in a birthing person’s pregnancy, prenatal care can be used as an effective preventative measure for adverse health outcomes, such as severe maternal morbidity and low neonatal birth weight.2,3 Services are typically established within the first six to eight weeks of pregnancy, following twelve to fifteen visits in total after the initial visit.4 The current model practiced within the United States recommends that patients visit monthly until twenty-eight weeks, bi-weekly until thirty-two weeks, and weekly until delivery.4 Visits are critical to promoting a safe delivery by effectively monitoring the patient's progress and development of the fetus. Healthcare providers are responsible for providing supportive care through medical screenings, lab testing for birth anomalies, image testing, and education (parenting, pregnancy materials, infant feeding).2 Services often include psychosocial support to address substance use, resources for domestic violence, mental health services, avenues for financial aid, and nutritional needs.4

The City of Philadelphia has a highly urban landscape, with individuals belonging to diverse social and cultural backgrounds that may hinder access to quality prenatal care. In 2020, only 52% of birthing persons sought care within the first trimester in Philadelphia, which is comparatively much lower than the national average of 77%.5,6 The Philadelphia Maternal Mortality Review Committee (MMRC) found that 32% of all pregnancy-associated deaths occurred in birthing persons who didn’t opt in for prenatal care or were too late (third trimester).6  Of these deaths, 69% of individuals had multiple co-morbidities that would have been screened and identified appropriately had the patient attended regular prenatal visits.6 These statistics capture the challenges from potential barriers patients may face to receiving adequate maternal and child care in Philadelphia.  Common barriers include financial constraints, transportation access, lifestyle limitations (childcare, paid time off from work), and overall distrust of the medical field stemming from perceived discrimination and cultural practice.7 Social indicators such as race, age, education levels, and socio-economic status have shown to have associations with receiving adequate prenatal care; however, nativity has never been explored in the literature for Philadelphia.  

Identifying currently underserved populations receiving inadequate access to prenatal services is critical for equitably promoting better maternal and child outcomes. However, there is minimal research in identifying potential social barriers migrant populations face in Philadelphia County.

**This project aims to determine the relationship between maternal demographic characteristics for birthing persons, especially immigrant populations, to assess which demographic of individuals may be undeserved in receiving adequate prenatal care services.**  *This project specifically used a multiple logistic regression approach to determine the social indicators of race, age, education level, and maternal nativity (Born in the US vs. Born outside of the US) with receiving adequate prenatal care (Y/N: >=10 visits made during pregnancy)* For comparative interest, results were compared from a state to city point-of-view to highlight differences in trends-- but not intended for the use of my capstone. 

Evaluations will require an intersectional approach for analysis. Biomedical informatics can be an effective statistical analysis tool for identifying the gravity of public health issues. The results can be helpful to many stakeholders within the maternal and child health sector, from community organizations to large-scale hospital systems. An improved understanding of prenatal care adequacy is critical for identifying barriers to eliminating current issues through robust program implementation. 

### Methods
Describe the data used and the general methodological approach. Subsequently, incorporate the complete R code necessary to retrieve and clean data and perform analysis. Be sure to include a description of code so that others (including your future self) can understand what you are doing and why. 

>DATABASE DETAILS: Using a population-based design, the quantitative assessment utilized data from the CDC’S WONDER Database, which collects information on an ad-hoc basis for various public health variables and demographic characteristics. The newest dataset was drawn from the Natality online database, which is compiled of data primarily obtained from birth certificates issued from 2016 to 2020 (most updated version). 

The social indicators of race, age, education level, and maternal nativity (born in the US versus born outside of the US) were selected to determine if adequate prenatal care had been provided to Philadelphia birthing person populations in 2020-2021 using the Kotelchuck Index in a dichotomous format. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), Adequate prenatal care is determined by two variables obtained from birth certificates which include when prenatal care was started and the number of prenatal visits until delivery. Typically, adequate care is achieved if a patient has completed 80% or roughly ten appointments. While the Kotelchuck Index cannot determine the quality of prenatal care or accurately be applied for high-risk pregnancies, it remains a commonly utilized method for determining if prenatal care services have been adequately provided.9 **Using the ACOG guidelines, adequate prenatal care was defined as if a patient had ten visits or more visits (visits>=10).** 

In this analysis, a multiple logistic regression was conducted using R Studio. Univariate analysis of each indicator was determined using logistic regression and chi-square for overall model fit. A multivariate logistic regression was then conducted to compute odd-ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).  The code was assessed by a data team by the Philadelphia Department of Public Health and the University of Pennsylvania. 

Based on the selected social indicators, we first identified the 118,531 births that occurred in Pennsylvania and extrapolated births in Philadelphia County (n=18,084). We excluded birthing persons based on missing data.  Maternal nativity was defined dichotomously based on whether the birthing person was US-Born or born outside of the US, including possessions. Race was categorized as White, Black or African American, Asian, or more than one Race. The Age groups were: 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, and 40-44, with ages 25-29 as the selected comparative group given the literature supports this age range typically has the lowest adverse health outcomes.8 Education followed the CDC’s eight levels of categories as follows 1: 8th grade or less, 2: 9th through 12th grade with no diploma, 3: High school graduate or GED Completed, 4: Some college credit but not a degree, 5: Associate Degree (AA, AS), 6: Bachelor’s degree (BA, AB, BS), 7: Master’s degree, 8: Doctorate or Professional degree. The following dataset would stratify education into four categories (1: less than high school, 2: High school and/or some college, 2: Bachelor’s and Associate degrees, 3: Higher education including Master’s, Doctorate, or Professional degrees). 

### Results 
Describe your results and include relevant tables, plots, and code/comments used to obtain them. End with a brief conclusion of your findings related to the question you set out to address. You can include references if you'd like, but this is not required.

Of the 18,084 births in Philadelphia County, PA, in 2020-2021, 43% of individuals received inadequate prenatal care (n=7,783). Our sample showed 1.87 decreased odds for Black birthing persons to receive adequate prenatal care when other predictor values were held constant (n=4,767 (61%), p<0.001) (aOR, 0.15, 95% CI, 0.13-0.18). As previous research has supported, individuals aged between 25-34 are more likely to receive attend ten or more prenatal visits likely due to lifestyle stability (25-29: 2574 (25%), 30-34: 4,044 (39%). Most individuals who had a high school degree or less had 76% heightened odds of receiving inadequate prenatal care (n=4757 (61%)) (aOR, 0.24, 95% CI, 0.16-0.37).  While there was a larger proportion of individuals born in the US (n=5129 (66%)), 59% of individuals born outside of the US did not receive adequate prenatal care. All results were statistically significant (p<0.001). **When holding other predictor variables constant, birthing persons born outside of the US had the most birthing persons born outside of the US had a 98% decreased odds of receiving adequate prenatal care compared to US Born (aOR, 0.02; 95% CI, 0.01-0.02).**

### Conclusion
Our results posit that overall many birthing persons in Philadelphia are not receiving quality prenatal care regardless of maternal characteristics. Given that 43% of the general population had recorded instances of attending less than ten visits, it is imperative to urge the implementation of programs that encourage increased utilization of prenatal visits. This exploration found that Black individuals with low education levels had decreased odds of receiving adequate prenatal care, which can be supported by existing literature.8,9 While this paper explored other social indicators; its primary interest was to understand the association of nativity with prenatal care outcomes. Migrant research is very limited within the State of Pennsylvania and, furthermore, in the City of Philadelphia. To our best knowledge, this is the first study to explore the association maternal nativity may have on receiving adequate prenatal care.  Results found that a large proportion of birthing persons born outside of the US are not receiving adequate prenatal care, which may likely be attributed to barriers such as English fluency and understanding of US medical practice.7,9 

The results of this study confirm the need to develop strategies for better healthcare service delivery models for prenatal care services, especially for immigrant populations. 

### Limitations & Future Steps 
This study was not able to use the intended data set and, therefore, may not be the most accurate depiction of maternal health outcomes in Philadelphia. The findings of this project will ideally be incorporated into a larger strategy proposal for the City of Philadelphia, which aims to propose a series of recommendations that the Department of Public Health can modify for implementation in Philadelphia to improve prenatal services to undocumented residents through insurance status.  We are awaiting IRB approval to conduct the same methods for Philadelphia’s live birth dataset, which would be more accurate and up-to-date. The following study will further assess the association among undocumented immigrants through insurance status and utilize a linear regression instead by breaking prenatal care adequacy into four categories for more specified results. Ideally, we would also do a geospatial distribution to determine the placement of delivery models to benefit the intended immigrant populations. 

### References
1.	Committee to Study the Prevention of Low Birthweight. Ensuring Access to Prenatal Care. National Academies Press (US); 1985. Accessed November 6, 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK214476/
2.	Alexander GR, Korenbrot CC. The role of prenatal care in preventing low birth weight. Future Child. 1995;5(1):103-120.
3.	Heaman MI, Sword W, Elliott L, et al. Barriers and facilitators related to use of prenatal care by inner-city women: perceptions of health care providers. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth. 2015;15(1):2. doi:10.1186/s12884-015-0431-5
4.	Peahl AF, Gourevitch RA, Luo EM, et al. Right-Sizing Prenatal Care to Meet Patients’ Needs and Improve Maternity Care Value. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2020;135(5):1027-1037. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000003820
5.	Pregnancy-Related Deaths: Data from Maternal Mortality Review Committees in 36 US States, 2017–2019 | CDC. Published September 17, 2022. Accessed September 20, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternal-mortality/erase-mm/data-mmrc.html
6.	Philadelphia Maternal Mortality Review Committee (MMRC). Improving Outcomes: Maternal Mortality in Philadelphia. Philadelphia Maternal Mortality Review Committee (MMRC); 2020. https://www.phila.gov/media/20210322093837/MMRReport2020-FINAL.pdf
7.	Swartz JJ, Hainmueller J, Lawrence D, Rodriguez MI. Expanding Prenatal Care to Unauthorized Immigrant Women and the Effects on Infant Health. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2017;130(5):938-945. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000002275
8.	Munro K, Jarvis C, Munoz M, D’Souza V, Graves L. Undocumented Pregnant Women: What Does the Literature Tell Us? J Immigrant Minority Health. 2013;15(2):281-291. doi:10.1007/s10903-012-9587-5
9.	Fabi R. Why Physicians Should Advocate for Undocumented Immigrants’ Unimpeded Access to Prenatal Care. AMA Journal of Ethics. 2019;21(1):93-99. doi:10.1001/amajethics.2019.93
10. Logistic Regression: Variables, RQs, and Assumptions.; 2021. Accessed December 1, 2022. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o7mWeZT4VH8
